1
A Sequential AC/DC Power Flow Algorithm for
Networks Containing Multi-terminal VSC HVDC
Systems
Jef Beerten, Student Member , IEEE, Stijn Cole, Student Member , IEEE, and Ronnie Belmans, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, a sequential AC/DC power ﬂow algo-
rithm is proposed to solve networks containing Multi-terminal
V oltage Source Converter High V oltage Direct Current (VSC
MTDC) systems. In VSC HVDC technology, the converter losses
add up to a signiﬁcant fraction of the overall system losses.
However, they are often neglected or not taken into account in
a proper manner in VSC HVDC power ﬂows. The algorithm
put forward in this paper takes the converter losses into account
using a generalized converter loss model. The converter steady
state equations are derived in their most general format, with
the AC network power injections as controlled quantities. It is
shown that correctly deﬁning the power setpoints with respect
to the system bus instead of the converter bus, as is often done
to simplify calculations, requires additional iterative calculations.
The DC system modelling method proposed in this paper does
not impose any restriction on the HVDC grid topology. A VSC
MTDC power ﬂow solver is incorporated into MA TPOWER to
show the validity of the proposed algorithm.
Index Terms —HVDC transmission, HVDC converters, load
ﬂow analysis, VSC HVDC.
I. I NTRODUCTION
I
N recent years, the power engineering world is showing
a growing interest in power transmission based on High
V oltage Direct Current (HVDC) technology in Multi-Terminal
(MTDC) conﬁgurations. This interest is explained by an ever
growing need for transmission capacity. Suggestions have been
made to construct a whole new overlaying DC ‘supergrid’,
in order to connect the growing share of renewables, which
is often located far away from the load centers. The DC
grid could be even offshore, connecting various offshore wind
farms and other renewable energy sources [1], [2].
It is unclear whether the supergrid will ever see the light
of day. Its precursors however, have been built and are in
operation since long time: The two multi-terminal HVDC
systems Hydro Qu ´ebec - New England and the Sardinia-
mainland Italy link, commissioned in respectively 1992 and
1989. The application of MTDC was preceded by many studies
since 1980, dealing with various aspects of MTDC. One of
the more prominent topics was the solution of the power ﬂow
problem of the integrated AC/DC grid [3]–[7].
Jef Beerten is funded by a research grant from the Research Foundation –
Flanders (FWO).
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering
(ESA T), Division ELECTA, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, bus 2445, 3001 Leuven-Heverlee, Belgium
(e-mail: jef.beerten@esat.kuleuven.be, stijn.cole@esat.kuleuven.be,
ronnie.belmans@esat.kuleuven.be).
The inherent technical speciﬁcs of the Current Source Con-
verter (CSC) technology, on which the conventional HVDC
systems are based, make that multi-terminal operation is
impractical if more than three converters are involved, thus
impeding an application of the technology in large scale,
meshed DC grids: It is for instance difﬁcult to reverse power
ﬂow in parallel operation and complex insulation and accurate
grounding schemes are needed in series conﬁguration.
V oltage Source Converters (VSC) HVDC have much better
prospects for multi-terminal operation: The DC side behaves
as a current source, rendering power ﬂow reversal a trivial
task. Unfortunately, because the operating principles of VSCs
are so different from those of CSCs, the power ﬂow algorithms
developed for CSC MTDC cannot be directly used for its
VSC counterpart. The general philosophy, however, remains
the same. The solution methods are usually subdivided in
sequential and uniﬁed methods. In sequential methods, the AC
and DC equations are solved sequentially (e.g. in [6], [8]); in
uniﬁed methods, the AC and DC system are solved together
(e.g. in [7]). In this paper, the sequential approach is applied to
the general AC/VSC MTDC system. The advantage of the se-
quential approach is that it is possible to incorporate a MTDC
system into existing AC based power ﬂow software, while
in the uniﬁed approach the whole program implementation
needs to be changed in order to solve the AC and DC system
together.
It is not the ﬁrst time that a sequential method for VSC
MTDC power ﬂow is developed. However, most of the meth-
ods presented in literature are not general enough: In [9]
an approximate solution is obtained by neglecting converter
losses and losses in the phase reactor, whereas in [10],
converter losses are neglected, DC variables are not accessible
and the power ﬂow setpoints are deﬁned at the converter bus
instead of the system bus. This simpliﬁes the calculations,
but is not in accordance with current practice in actual VSC
HVDC systems. The major contribution of this paper is the
development of a general and detailed VSC MTDC power
ﬂow calculation, using the full power ﬂow equations, including
converter losses, and deﬁning the power setpoints with respect
to the system bus. The generalized modelling approach used
for the DC network does not impose any restrictions on the
topology or conﬁguration of the DC network. Furthermore, it
is shown how the VSC MTDC sequential power ﬂow method
can be implemented in an existing AC power ﬂow package.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: The sec-
ond section describes the modelling of the converter stations,
978-1-4244-6551-4/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE
2
Udc
Ps,Q s Pc,Q c
Pdc
U s U c
Fig. 1. VSC HVDC converter station.
including phase reactors, operating modes, and with special
care for the converter losses, often neglected in VSC HVDC
power ﬂow. The third section discusses the DC grid power ﬂow
model and its efﬁcient solution, proposed previously in our
paper [11]. A fourth section addresses the interaction between
the AC and the DC grid. It is shown in this section that deﬁning
the power setpoints with respect to the system bus requires
additional iterative calculations. Finally, simulation results are
discussed in the ﬁfth section. The results are obtained by
combining the proposed methodology with the open source
Matlab toolbox, MA TPOWER [12].
II. VSC CONVERTER STA TIONS
In a VSC MTDC network, the VSC converter stations form
the links between the AC and the DC networks. In this section,
the modelling of the converter stations is discussed. A ﬁrst
part addresses the converter power ﬂow equations and the
assumptions used in the analysis. The second part discusses
the different control modes. The inclusion of the converter
losses into the power ﬂow algorithm are treated in the third
part of this section.
A. Converter station model
In VSC transmission, a voltage waveform is synthesized by
the converter station, either by a two-level or multilevel Pulse
Width Modulation (PWM) technique, commercially available
as HVDC Light [13] or by using a multimodular converter
(MMC) approach, commercially available as HVDC PLUS
[14]. When the output wave forms are synthesized using
PWM, the converter station includes low pass ﬁlter equipment
to block the ﬂow of higher order harmonics into the AC
transmission system. In the MMC technology the sine output
waves are directly built up by the inverter outputs without
using a PWM technique, resulting in the absence of ﬁltering
requirements. Fig. 1 shows a VSC HVDC converter station
with the phase reactors, transformer and low pass ﬁlters
(displayed in gray).
Regarding the power ﬂow algorithms, a converter stations
can be modelled as a controllable voltage source behind a
complex impedance, which includes both the phase reactor and
the transformer. Since the ﬁltering requirements are heavily
dependent on the technology considered, the ﬁlters are not
taken into account in this paper. Fig. 2 shows a single
phase equivalent diagram of n converter stations connected
to different busses in the AC network.
The converter equations reduce to these of an impedance
with a controllable voltage at the converter side. With Us =
AC
Us1
Zc1
Uc1
Us2
Zc2
Uc2Usn
Zcn
Ucn
...
Fig. 2. Equivalent single phase power ﬂow model for multiple converter
stations connected to the AC grid.
Us∠δs and Uc = Uc∠δc respectively the AC bus voltage
and the converter voltage and Zc = Gc + jBc the complex
equivalent impedance, the equations for the power injected
into the AC grid are given by
Ps =−U2
s Gc + UsUc[Gc cos(δs − δc)+ Bc sin(δs − δc)](1)
Qs= U2
s Bc + UsUc[Gc sin(δs − δc) − Bc cos(δs − δc)](2)
The power ﬂowing to the AC network at the converter end
can be written as
Pc = U2
c Gc − UsUc[Gc cos(δs − δc) − Bc sin(δs − δc)](3)
Qc=−U2
c Bc + UsUc[Gc sin(δs − δc)+ Bc cos(δs − δc)](4)
B. Converter control modes
Contrary to the LCC technology, which suffers from a
high reactive power demand due to the ﬁring delays and the
commutation process, the VSC technology is able to control
the reactive power ﬂow at each converter station independently
from the active power output to the AC grid (constant Q-
control). There is also a possibility for the converters to control
the AC bus voltage magnitude Us by adopting its reactive
power output to keep up the system voltage in a way similar
to a synchronous generator (constant V -control).
When the two-terminal VSC HVDC concept is extended to
a multi-terminal conﬁguration, all but one converter control
their active power injection into (or withdrawn from) the AC
grid (constant P -control). One converter station will adopt
its active power injection to control its DC bus voltage Udc.
In this way, this converter can be regarded as a ”DC slack
converter”. The converter stations can therefore be in PQ -o r
PV -control, with an exception being made for the converter
connected to the DC slack bus. The actual value of the active
power injection of this converter is not known prior to the
power ﬂow as this quantity depends on the losses in the DC
network and in the converter station, as will be shown in the
next section.
C. Converter station losses
Apart from the losses in the phase reactor, which are taken
into account by the equivalent phase impedance Zc, the other
3
TABLE I
PER UNIT CONVERTER LOSS COEFFICIENTS
ab c
rectiﬁer 11.033 3.464 4.400 ×10−3
inverter 6.667
1
2
3
R24
R14
R12 R23
R34
Udc,1
Pdc,1 Pdc,3
Udc,3
Pdc,2
Udc,2
4
Pdc,4
Udc,4
Fig. 3. Equivalent single phase power ﬂow model of a 4-bus DC network.
converter losses are taken into account using a generalized
converter station loss model for a typical VSC HVDC link
with a rating of 600 MW and a DC voltage of ±300 kV [15].
In this loss model, the converter station losses are written as
a function of the reactor current magnitude Ic and thus of
the active and reactive power exchanged with the AC system.
The overall converter losses Ploss can be split up into three
aggregated loss components, further discussed in [16]: No load
losses and losses linearly and quadratically depending on the
reactor current:
Ploss=a + b · Ic + c · I2
c , (5)
with Ic =
√
Pc2 + Qc2
√
3Uc
. (6)
The per unit coefﬁcients a, b and c in Tab. I are based on the
data provided in [15] and are used in the sequential AC/DC
power ﬂow algorithm.
III. DC G RID MODEL
The DC grid model used in this paper and presented in [11],
is similar to the AC network models used in a conventional
AC power ﬂow. In a steady state analysis, the overall ﬂow
pattern is dictated by the line resistances and the DC voltage
magnitude differences between the DC busses. Fig. 3 shows
an equivalent steady state model of a 4-bus DC grid, which
can be implemented using a pure resistance network.
The current injected at a DC node i can thus be written as
the current ﬂowing to the other n − 1 nodes in the network
Idc,i=
n∑
j=1
j⁄=i
Ydc,ij · (Udc,i − Udc,j). (7)
Combining all currents injected in the DC network by the
VSC converters results in
Idc=YdcUdc, (8)
AC DC
Usn
Zcn Ucn
Us2
Zc2 Uc2
Us1
Zc1 Uc1
...
Udc,n
Udc2
Udc1
Fig. 4. Schematic overview of the sequential power ﬂow approach
with Idc =[ Idc,1,Idc,2 ...I dc,n]T the DC current vector,
Udc =[ Udc,1,Udc,2 ...U dc,n]T the DC voltage vector and Ydc
the DC bus matrix. Assuming a bipolar DC grid, the active
power injected in node i can be written as
Pdc,i=2Udc,iIdc,i, ∀i ≤ n. (9)
The current injections Idc are not known prior to the power
ﬂow solution for the DC grid, whereas the active power
injections Pdc are known as a results of the AC power ﬂow
for all busses except for the DC slack bus. Combining (8) and
(9) results in a system of non-linear equations:
0=YdcUdc −
[ Pdc,i
2Udc,i
]
. (10)
As one DC bus controls its DC voltage and the others control
their active power injection, the problem has to be rearranged.
To simplify notation, but without loss of generality, we assume
the last converter to be the DC slack bus. The vector of the
unknowns can be written as
X=
[ X1
X2
]
=
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣
Udc,1
...
Udc,(n−1)
Pdc,n
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦. (11)
The DC bus admittance matrix is partitioned as follows:
Ydc=
[ Y11 Y12
Y21 y22
]
(12)
The matrix Y11 is of dimension (n − 1) x (n − 1), Y12 is a
column vector of length n − 1, Y21 a row vector of length
n − 1, and y22 a scalar.
This leads to a system of equations that can be solved by
an iterative Newton method:
{ 0= Y11X1 + Y12 · udcref − Pdc,i/(2X1i)
0= Y21X1 + y22 · udcref − X2/(2udcref ) (13)
IV . AC/DC POWER FLOW
The models derived in the previous section are now com-
bined in a sequential AC/DC power ﬂow algorithm. Fig. 4
shows a generalized MTDC network based on VSC technology
with n terminals. In the sequential approach, the DC grid
variables are used as inputs to solve the AC equations and
vice versa, which allows an easy integration of DC grids into
existing AC power ﬂow programs.
4
AC network
power ﬂow
DC slack
bus power
estimate
Converter
powers
and losses
DC network
power ﬂow
DC
slack bus
iteration
Converged?Output
Update
DC slack
bus power
yes no
Fig. 5. Sequential ﬂow chart of the sequential VSC AC/DC power ﬂow
algorithm.
Fig. 5 shows the ﬂow chart of the sequential power ﬂow
algorithm. As discussed in the previous section, the DC
network as well as the AC network each have to be solved
iteratively. Due to the converter loss inclusion, an extra internal
iteration is needed to calculate the DC slack bus active power
injection Ps,n when the DC power injection is known as
a result of the DC network power ﬂow. Apart from these
internal iterations, an external iteration is needed to ensure
that the overall solution converges while the overall power ﬂow
solution changes due to the updates of the DC slack bus power
injection. In this section, the different parts of the sequential
power ﬂow shown in Fig. 5 will be subsequently addressed.
A. AC network power ﬂow
The power ﬂow equations for bus i in an AC grid with m
nodes can be written as
Pi(U, δ)= Ui
m∑
j=1
Uj
[
Gij cos(δi − δj)+ Bij sin(δi − δj)
]
,
(14)
Qi(U, δ)= Ui
m∑
j=1
Uj
[
Gij sin(δi − δj) − Bij cos(δi − δj)
]
.
(15)
The non-linear set of power ﬂow equations for all AC busses
can be solved using a standard Newton-Raphson based power
ﬂow:
⎡
⎣
(∂P
∂δ
)(k) (
U ∂P
∂U
)(k)
(
∂Q
∂δ
)(k) (
U ∂Q
∂U
)(k)
⎤
⎦
[
Δδ(k)
ΔU
U
(k)
]
=
[
ΔP(k)
ΔQ(k)
]
(16)
In the sequential algorithms, the converter stations are included
in the AC network calculations as shown in Fig. 6. To include
the VSC stations, the power mismatches ΔP(k) and ΔQ(k)
in (16) are extended to include the power injections by the
converter stations into the AC network. If the converter is in
AC
Usn
Us2
Us1
PQ
PV
PQ
...
Fig. 6. AC network power ﬂow with converter stations treated as constant
negative loads and voltage controlled busses.
a constant Q-control mode, the reactive output is added to the
power mismatches as a negative load:
ΔQ(k)
i = Qgen
i − (Qdem
i − Qs,i) − Qi(U(k), δ(k)). (17)
If the converter is used in a constant V -control, the station
can be treated in a way similar to a voltage controlling AC
generator, with an unknown reactive power injection. This is
implemented by changing the AC bus from a PQ -node into
a PV -node with a dummy generator to calculate the reactive
power input.
For every converter station, except for the DC slack con-
verter, the active power injection Ps into the AC grid is known.
The active power mismatches are extended as
ΔP(k)
i = Pgen
i − (Pdem
i − Ps,i) − Pi(U(k), δ(k)). (18)
For the DC slack converter, the active power injection itself
is a result of the power ﬂow solution and therefore unknown.
As an initial estimate, the converter stations, phase reactors
and the DC network are assumed to be lossless. With the nth
converter station operating as the DC slack converter,
P(0)
s,n = −
n−1∑
j=1
Ps,j. (19)
For the kth iteration, the solution from the previous iteration
cycle is used as an estimate for P(k)
s,n .
B. Converter calculation and DC network power ﬂow
Once the AC grid voltages Us and power injections Ps and
Qs are known as a result of the AC power ﬂow, the voltages
Uc at the converter side can be found by ﬁrst calculating the
converter currents Ic
Ic,i = Ps,i − jQs,i
U ∗
s,i
, ∀i<n . (20)
Using this expression for Ic,i to calculate the complex voltage
drop over the converter impedance Zc,i, the voltage at the
converter side can be written as
Uc,i = Us,i − Zc,i · Ps,i − jQs,i
U ∗
s,i
, ∀i<n . (21)
The converter powers at the converter side Pc and Qc are
thereafter calculated using (3) − (4). After calculating the
converter power losses Ploss using (5), the DC grid power
inputs are known. The DC network voltages Udc and DC
slack bus power Pdc,n result from iteratively solving (13).
5
Inputs
P (0)
c from (22)
Us,δ s
U (k)
c and δ(k)
c
using (23) – (29)
Q(k)
c from (4)
P (k)
loss from (5) – (6)
P (k)
c using (22)
Check
convergence Pc
Update Pc
Output
Ps from (1)
yes no
Fig. 7. DC Slack bus iteration ﬂow chart.
C. DC slack bus iteration
After calculating the DC network, the active power Ps,n
injected into the AC grid by the DC slack bus converter has
to be solved iteratively since the converter losses depend on
the converter current magnitude Ic,n, which is yet unknown.
The procedure put forward in this paper uses the previous AC
grid state to calculate the DC slack bus active power injection
Ps,n. The voltage at the grid side of the DC slack bus converter
Us,n is kept constant (both in magnitude and in phase angle)
to calculate Ps,n since it is the solution for the iteration cycle
under consideration. Also Qs,n, the reactive power injected
into the grid by the DC slack bus converter is kept constant
during the DC slack bus iteration, due to the strong relation
between reactive power and voltage magnitude, which is kept
constant at the grid side for this iteration cycle.
The iteration to calculate the DC slack bus power injection
into the AC grid is depicted in Fig. 7. The subscript n
to indicate the slack bus has been omitted to simplify the
notation. To start the iteration, an initial estimate is needed
for the converter side active power injection. Using the power
injection resulting from the DC power ﬂow and an estimation
of the converter losses P(0)
loss,n deducted from the results of
the AC network power ﬂow in the overall iteration cycle, an
initial value is given by
P(k)
c,n = Pdc,n − P(k)
loss,n. (22)
By convention, the power ﬂow direction is chosen to be
positive when power is ﬂowing to the AC network bus. In
the calculation of the DC slack bus active power injection, a
Newton-Raphson iteration is used to calculate U(k)
c and δ(k)
c
using (2) – (3):
⎡
⎢⎣
(
∂Pc
∂δc
)(j) (
Uc
∂Pc
∂Uc
)(j)
(
∂Qs
∂δc
)(j) (
Uc
∂Qs
∂Uc
)(j)
⎤
⎥⎦
[
Δδ(j)
c
ΔUc
Uc
(j)
]
=
[
ΔP(j)
c
ΔQ(j)
s
]
. (23)
134~
45+j15 40+j5131.1 90.8
41.8 40.3 19.4 19.3
89.3 74.0
16.8 17.5 2.9 4.7 6.6 0.5
86.9 72.9
2 5
6.6 5.253.4
4.8
54.7
5.6
2 5~
20+j10 60+j10
40 61.6
Fig. 8. Line powers of the 5-bus test network without the VSC MTDC
system. Legend: → Active power ( MW) and ↛ Reactive power ( MVAr).
TABLE II
AC BUS VOLTAGES WITHOUT AND WITH A VSC MTDC SYSTEM
bus type Without MTDC With MTDC
U (p.u.) δ (deg) U (p.u.) δ (deg)
1 slack 1.060 0.00 1.060 0.00
2P V 1.000 -2.06 1.000 -2.39
3P Q 0.987 -4.64 1.000 -3.90
4P Q 0.984 -4.96 0.996 -4.27
5P Q 0.972 -5.77 0.991 -4.15
The elements of this Jacobian matrix are given by
( ∂Pc
∂δc
)(j)
=−Q(j)
c − U(j)
c
2
Bc, (24)
(
Uc
∂Pc
∂Uc
)(j)
= P(j)
c + U(j)
c
2
Gc, (25)
( ∂Qs
∂δc
)(j)
= −P(j)
s − Us
2 Gc, (26)
(
Uc
∂Qs
∂Uc
)(j)
= Q(j)
s − Us
2 Bc, (27)
with values for Ps,Qs,Pc and Qc from (1) – (4). The power
mismatches ΔP(j)
c and ΔQ(j)
s can be written as
ΔP(j)
c =P(k)
c − Pc(Us,U (j)
c ), (28)
ΔQ(j)
s = Qs − Qs(Us,U (j)
c ). (29)
In these equations, the superscript j refers to the inner NR
iteration, whereas the superscript k refers to the outer DC
slack bus iteration.
After a convergence of Pc,n, the active power injected into the
AC network Ps,n is calculated (Fig. 7) and thereafter checked
for convergence in the overall iteration loop (Fig. 5).
V. S IMULA TION RESULTS
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
sequential algorithm, the sequential AC/VSC MTDC power
ﬂow algorithm has been integrated with the AC power ﬂow
program MA TPOWER [12], an open-source Matlab toolbox.
The input data format is similar to the format used for AC
6
134~
45+j15 40+j5133.7 84.3
35.3 34.2 23.1 23.0
98.4 71.4
13.0 15.1 4.7 6.5 0.1 0.3
95.7 69.6
2 5
0.1 4.725.1
0.4
25.3
1.9
2 5~
20+j10 60+j10
40 32.8
(a)
3
20.7 7.2
28.0 27.7
52 35.0 5.060.0 40.0
(b)
Fig. 9. Power ﬂow solution with a VSC MTDC system between busses 2, 3 and 5: (a) Line powers in the 5-bus test network, (b) Line powers and AC grid
injections of the 3-bus VSC MTDC system. Legend: → Active power ( MW) and ↛ Reactive power ( MVAr).
TABLE III
POWER FLOW SOLUTION WITH A VSC MTDC SYSTEM -C ONVERTER STA TIONS
bus Control mode Converter V oltage Bus injection Reactor loss Converter loss DC Power DC V oltage
Uc (p.u.) δc (deg) Ps (MW) Qs (MVAr) P (MW) Q (MVAr) Ploss (MW) Pdc (MW) Udc (p.u.)
2 P-Q 0.984 -3.760 -60.00 -40.00 0.05 2.08 1.36 -58.59 1.008
3 Slack - V 1.003 -3.431 20.68 7.17 0.00 0.19 1.15 21.84 1.000
5 P-Q 0.993 -3.340 35.00 5.00 0.01 0.51 1.19 36.21 0.998
power ﬂows. A general DC grid can therefore be simulated,
with an arbitrary number of terminals and topology. Simula-
tions were carried out on a 5-bus test network based on [17],
[18] with a 3-terminal MTDC network and on the IEEE 300-
bus network with a 10-terminal MTDC network. The results
from the 5-bus network are included in this paper and are
discussed in this section.
Fig. 8 shows the line powers of the power ﬂow solution
without a MTDC network. The bus voltages of this solution
are given in Tab. II. The MTDC network is connected between
busses 2, 3 and 5. The converter at bus 3 is chosen as DC slack
converter, thereby controlling the voltage on the DC network.
The DC slack converter is also used to control the voltage
at bus 3, whereas the other converters are directly controlling
their reactive power injections (constant Q-mode). Data on
the converter station phase reactors and line resistances were
obtained from [13]. The results of the sequential algorithm
are shown in Figs. 9a and 9b. The AC bus voltages are given
in Tab. II. Since the converter station at bus 3 is working
in a voltage controlling mode, the reactive power injection is
adapted in order to keep Us,3 equal to 1.0 p.u.. The results on
the converter stations are included in Tab. III. From this table,
it is clear that the constant power losses take the largest share
in the converter station losses. This is due to the fact that a
base power of 100 MW is used for the MTDC connection
whereas the MTDC loading is kept relatively low.
VI. C ONCLUSION
The sequential AC/DC power ﬂow algorithm presented in
this paper effectively solves AC networks containing VSC
MTDC systems. The proposed solution method is general
and offers the ability to include an arbitrary DC system into
existing AC networks. There are no limits on the number
of converters or on the topology of the DC grid. The algo-
rithm is also accurate: Converter losses are represented by
a generalized loss model based on a second order function
of the reactor current and the full power ﬂow equations
are used for the AC side of the converter. Furthermore, the
power setpoints are deﬁned with respect to the system voltage,
which necessitates an additional iterative procedure for the
DC slack bus converter. The method has been implemented
in MA TPOWER, and properly tested. Numerical simulations
show the validity of the algorithm to include an arbitrary VSC
MTDC system into an AC network.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Gordon, “Supergrid to the rescue,” Power Engineer , vol. 20, no. 5,
pp. 30–33, Oct.-Nov. 2006.
[2] W. Lu and B.-T. Ooi, “Optimal acquisition and aggregation of offshore
wind power by multiterminal voltage-source HVDC,” IEEE Trans.
Power Del., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 201–206, 2003.
[3] C. M. Ong and A. Hamzei-nejad, “A general-purpose multiterminal DC
load-ﬂow,”IEEE Trans. Power App. Syst., vol. PAS-100, no. 7, pp. 3166–
3174, Jul. 1981.
[4] H. Fudeh and C. M. Ong, “A simple and efﬁcient AC-DC load-ﬂow
method for multiterminal DC systems,” IEEE Trans. Power App. Syst. ,
vol. PAS-100, no. 11, pp. 4389–4396, Nov. 1981.
[5] T. Smed, G. Andersson, G. B. Sheble, and L. L. Grigsby, “A new
approach to AC/DC power ﬂow,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 1238–1244, Aug. 1991.
[6] M. E. El-Hawary and S. T. Ibrahim, “A new approach to AC-DC load
ﬂow analysis,” Electric Power Systems Research , vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 193
– 200, 1995.
[7] M. El-Marsafawy and R. Mathur, “A new, fast technique for load-
ﬂow solution of integrated multi-terminal AC/DC systems,” IEEE Trans.
Power App. Syst. , vol. 99, no. 1, p. 10, Jan./Feb. 1980.
7
[8] U. Arifoglu, “The power ﬂow algorithm for balanced and unbalanced
bipolar multiterminal ac-dc systems,” Electric Power Systems Research ,
vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 239 – 246, 2003.
[9] Q. Chen, G.-Q. Tang, and W. X., “AC-DC power ﬂow algorithm
for multi-terminal VSC-HVDC systems,” Electric power automation
equipment, vol. 25, no. 6, p. 6, 2005.
[10] L. Gengyin, Z. Ming, H. Jie, L. Guangkai, and L. Haifeng, “Power
ﬂow calculation of power systems incorporating VSC-HVDC,” in Proc.
International Conference on Power System Technology PowerCon 2004 ,
vol. 2, Nov. 21–24, 2004, pp. 1562–1566.
[11] S. Cole, J. Beerten, and R. Belmans, “Generalized dynamic VSC MTDC
model for power system stability studies,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. ,
submitted for publication.
[12] MA TPOWER website. [Online]. Available:
http://www.pserc.cornell.edu/matpower/
[13] P . Haugland, “It’s time to connect - technical description of HVDC Light
technology,” ABB, Tech. Rep., March 2008.
[14] M. Davies, M. Dommaschk, J. Dorn, J. Lang, D. Retzmann, and D. Soe-
rangr, “HVDC PLUS - basics and principle of operation,” Siemens, Tech.
Rep., 2008.
[15] G. Daelemans, K. Srivastava, M. Reza, S. Cole, and R. Belmans,
“Minimization of steady-state losses in meshed networks using VSC
HVDC,” in Proc. IEEE PES General Meeting ’09 , Calgary, Canada,
Jul. 26–30 2009.
[16] G. Daelemans, “VSC HVDC in meshed networks,” Master’s thesis,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, 2008.
[17] S. G. W. and A. H. El-Abaid, Computer Methods in Power System
Analysis. Kogakusha, Japan: McGraw-Hill, 1968.
[18] E. Acha, C. R. Fuerte-Esquivel, H. Ambriz-P ´erez, and C. Angeles-
Camacho, F ACTS: Modelling and Simulation in Power Networks. West-
Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
Jef Beerten (S’07) was born in Belgium in 1985.
He received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engi-
neering from the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
(K.U.Leuven), Leuven, Belgium, in 2008, where he
is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree. He
is a Research Assistant with the division ESA T-
ELECTA division of K.U.Leuven. His research in-
terests include power system control, integration of
renewables and multiterminal HVDC in particular.
Mr. Beerten holds a Ph.D. fellowship from the
Research Foundation Flanders (FWO).
Stijn Cole (S’06) received the M.Sc. degree in elec-
trical engineering in 2005 from the Katholieke Uni-
versiteit Leuven (K.U.Leuven), Belgium. Since 2005
he is working as a research assistant at K.U.Leuven.
He is a member of ELECTA, the Electrical Energy
research group, of the department of Electrical En-
gineering of the K.U.Leuven, where he is working
towards a Ph.D. His ﬁelds of interest include power
systems, grid of the future, and HVDC.
Ronnie Belmans (S’77-M’84-SM’89-F’05) re-
ceived the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering in
1979 and the Ph.D. degree in 1984, both from the
K.U.Leuven, Belgium, the Special Doctorate in 1989
and the Habilitierung in 1993, both from the RWTH,
Aachen, Germany. Currently, he is a full profes-
sor with the K.U.Leuven, teaching electric power
and energy systems. His research interests include
techno-economic aspects of power systems, power
quality and distributed generation. He is also guest
professor at Imperial College of Science, Medicine
and Technology, London-UK. Since June 2002 he is chairman of the board
of directors of ELIA, the Belgian transmission grid operator.